Fake news detection: a systematic literature review of
machine learning algorithms and datasets
‘Humberto Fernandes Villla ® [ Universidade FUMEC | humberto.villela@gmaiLcom |
Fibio Corréa © | Universidade FUMEC | fabiocontact@ gmail.com |
Jurema Suely de Aratijo Nery Ribeiro © | Universidade FUMEC | jurema nery@gmailcom |
Air Rabelo © [ Universidade FUMEC | air @fumec.br |
Daclntan Barbosa Feres Carvalho ® [ Universidade Federal de So Jodo del-Rei | darlinton@acm.org |
Abstract
Fake news (ie. false news created 0 have a high capacity for dissemination and malicious intentions) s a
problem of great inert to society today since t has achieved unprecedented politcal, economic, and ockl -
pacts. Taking advantage of modern digital communication and information technologies, they are widely propa-
ated through social medi, being ther use tenional and challenging 0 dent. Tn onde o mitigate the damage.
caused by fake news, researchers have been seeking the development of automated mechanisms to detect hem,
such as algorithms based on machine learning as wel asthe datasets employed in this developmen. Thi resech
ms to analyze the machine eaming algorithms and datasets usd In trining 1 ently ake news published In
he lnerature. 1 exploratory research with a qualiatve approach, which use a research protocol to dently
studies wih the intention of analyzing them. As a esl, we have the algorithms Stacking Method. Bidirectional
Recurcent Neural Network (BIRNN). and Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), with 99.95%, 99.8%, and 99.8%
accuracy. respectively. Although his accuracy is expressive, most of the research employed datasets In controlled
environments (e.. Kagale) or without information updated i realtime (om social networks). Sl, only few
Studies ave been applied in octal network environments, where the most significant dissemination of disinfor-
‘mation occurs nowadays. Kaggle was the platform identified wih the most frequently used datasets, being suc-
ceeded by Weibo, FNC_1, COVID-19 Fake News, and Twitter. For future research, studies should be cared out
in addition 0 news about politics, the area that was the primary motivator fot the growth of research from 2017,
and he use of hybrid methods for entifying fake news
Keywords: Algoriths, datas, accuracy. fake news, aruictal intelligence.
. that is, according to the datasets used for raining (Ahuja &
1 Introduction Kumar, 2020). For this reason, Jiang et al (2021) and Ahuja
and Kumar (2020) recommend continuing research using
Currently, the tem fake news s onthe rise as this type of Soc HURRY B20) Keanent Sonim rene SEG
news can remarkably influence society, promoting signifi. 10 HES 8
cant political, economic, or soclal impacts (Zhang et al, Nevertheless, recurring studies to detect fake news have
2016; Islam et al, 2020). They are false news created to be - 8
‘highly broadcastable, usually with malicious intent (i.e., to achieved relevant accomplishments. The research by Bur
4 ‘ghly ro hn alsehood) . foot and Baldwin (2009) reached 71% accuracy in detecting.
jecelve, cause ambiguity, or fa'senao fake news, while Ahmed, Traore, and Saad (2017) raised
Inthe political context, specifically, Almeida eral. (2021)
this metric to 879%, the same percentage achieved by Low et
point out he impacts of fake news on the US presidential 4) (p07
elections in 2016, having President Donald Trump elected. Medeirne and Reaca (2190) rarried rast reconrrh aiming